Lab 20 Working with Editors




We can use editors to edit file content. 
There are multiple editors available. 


1) vi editor 
2) nano editor 


1. Working with vi Editor: 

vi means visual editor. 
We can use vi to create new files and to edit content of the existing files. 


$ vi file1.txt 


If file1.txt is not available, then a new file will be created and opened that file for editing purpose. 


To save this empty file we should use :wq (w means save and q means exit) 
If the file already contains some data then editor will be opened that file and ready for edit. 


How to edit the File: 
There are 3 types of modes in file editing 


1) Command Mode: 
* It is the default mode. 
* Here we can use any vi command. 
* From command mode, we can enter into insert mode by using multiple ways, but mostly by using i. 


 2) Insert Mode OR Input Mode: 
* In this mode, we can modify file data. We can insert/append new data. 
* From insert mode, we can enter into command mode by using <Esc> key. 


3) Exit Mode: 
* To quit from the editor. 
* From the command mode we have to press: then we can enter into exit mode. 


How to Insert and Append Data: 
A 🡪 To Append data at the end of the line 
I 🡪 To Insert data at the beginning of the line 
a 🡪 To append data to the right side of the cursor position (Just after the cursor position) 
i 🡪 To insert data to the left side of the cursor position (Just before the cursor position)


How to Delete Data: 


We can delete data either by character wise or by word wise or by line wise. 
deletion character wise: 
x 🡪 To delete a single character (del key) 
3x 🡪 To delete 3 characters. Instead of 3, we can pass any number. 
X 🡪 To delete previous character (backspace key) 
3X 🡪 To delete last 3 previous characters 


Deletion Words wise: 


dw 🡪 To delete current word. 
3dw 🡪 To delete 3 words 




Deletion Line wise: 


dd 🡪 To delete current line 
3dd 🡪 To delete 3 lines 
d$ 🡪 Deletes from current position to end of line. 
d^ 🡪 Deletes from current position to beginning of the line. 
dgg 🡪 Deletes from beginning of the file to current cursor position. 
Dg 🡪 Deletes from current position to end of file. 


How to Replace Data: 
r 🡪 Replace current character. 
R 🡪 To replace multiple characters from the current position. 
S OR cc 🡪 To replace a single line 


Opening New Lines to Insert Data: 
O🡪 To open a line above the cursor position.(i.e before current line) 
o 🡪 To open a line below the cursor position (i.e after current line) 


Copy and Paste Data: 
yy 🡪 To Copy a Line (yanking) 
3yy 🡪 To copy 3 lines 
yw 🡪 To copy a word 
3yw 🡪 To copy 3 words 
y$ 🡪 To copy from current cursor position to end of line. 
y^ 🡪 To copy from beginning of the line to current cursor position. 
p 🡪 Paste above the cursor position 
P 🡪 Paste below the cursor position


Cursor Navigation Commands: 


k 🡪 Top Arrow 
j 🡪 Bottom Arrow 
l 🡪 Right Arrow 
h 🡪 Left Arrow 
3k 🡪 3 Times Top Arrow 
3j 🡪 3 Times Bottom Arrow 
3l 🡪 3 Times Right Arrow 
3h 🡪 3 Times Left Arrow 
$ 🡪 End of the Current Line (End Key) 
^ 🡪 Beginning of the Current Line (Home Key) 
H 🡪 Beginning of the Current Page 
M 🡪 Middle of the Current Page 
L 🡪 End of the Current Page 
We are not required to use these because keyboard arrow keys aleady working. 
b(nb) 🡪 Back to beginning of the Word 
3b 🡪 Back to beginning of the 3rd (ie 3rd previous Word) 
e(ne) 🡪 End of the Current Word 
w(nw) 🡪 Forward to beginning of next Word. 
G 🡪 Move to last line (ie end of the file) 
at exit mode 
:1 🡪 To go to 1st line 
:7 🡪 To go to 7th line 
ctrl+f 🡪 One Page Forward (Page Down) 
ctrl+b 🡪 One Page Backward( Page Up) 
Note: If we want to perform undo previous operation then we should use 'u' 
u 🡪 Means undo previous operation 



Exit Mode Commands: 
:w 🡪 Save File Data 
:wq 🡪 Save and Quit from the Editor 
:q 🡪 Quit Editor 
:q! 🡪 Force Quit. If we perform any changes those will be discarded. 
:set nu 🡪 To set line numbers in the editor 
:set nonu 🡪 To remove line numbers 
:n 🡪 Place the cursor to the nth line 
:$ 🡪 Place the cursor to the last line 
:!<unix_command> 🡪 To execute any command



Eg: 
:!date 🡪 To check system date 
:!cal 🡪 To check calander 
Note: vi +7 demo.txt 
open demo.txt and enter into 7th line 


Working with nano Editor: 

 It is command line editor. 
 It can be used to create new files and edit content of existing files. 
 It is almost like notepad. 


Various Options: 
ctrl+g (F1) Display this help text 
ctrl+x (F2) Close the current file buffer / Exit from nano 
ctrl+o (F3) Write the current file to disk 
ctrl+r (F5) Insert another file into the current one 
ctrl+w (F6) Search forward for a string or a regular expression 
ctrl+\ (M-R) Replace a string or a regular expression 
ctrl+k (F9) Cut the current line and store it in the cutbuffer 
ctrl+u (F10) Uncut from the cutbuffer into the current line 
But main important options: 
ctrl+o 🡪 To save content 
ctrl+x 🡪 To quit from the editor